.. _capabilities:

*****************
Software Features
*****************

This section highlights some of the key features of gprMax that are useful for GPR modelling as well as more general electromagnetic simulations.

Python API
==========

There is now a **Python API**, which includes all the functionality of the input file (hash) commands as well as several more advanced features. It allows users to access to gprMax functions directly from Python by importing the gprMax module. This method is recommended for those who prefer to use Python or need access to specific API-only advanced features, and is described in the :ref:`Python API <input-api>` section. There are several advantages to using the Python API: 

1. Users can take advantage of the Python language - for instance, the structural elements of Python can be utilised more easily.
2. gprMax objects can be used directly within functions, classes, modules and packages. In this way, collections of components can be defined, reused, and modified. For example, complex targets can be imported from a separate module and combined with an antenna from another module.
3. The API can interface with other Python libraries. For example, the API could be used to create a parametric antenna and the external library Scipy could then be used to optimise its parameters.

Subgridding
===========

Including finely detailed objects or regions of high dielectric strength in FDTD modeling can dramatically increase the computational burden of the method. This is because the conditionally stable nature of the algorithm requires a minimum time step for a given spatial discretization. Thus, when the spatial discretization is lowered, either to reduce numerical dispersion or include small-sized features, the time step must be reduced. Also, the number of spatial cells is increased. One approach to reducing the overall computational cost is to introduce local finely discretized regions into a coarser finite-difference grid. This approach is known as subgridding. The computing time is reduced since there are fewer cells to solve. Also, there are fewer iterations since the coarse time step is maintained in the coarse region. gprMax uses a new Huygens subgridding (HSG) algorithm with a novel artificial loss mechanism called the switched Huygens subgridding (SHSG). For a detailed description of subgridding and the SHSG method please read [HAR2021]_. Examples of how to use the subgridding functionality can be found in the :ref:`Advanced features <examples-subgrid>` section.

Dispersive materials
====================

gprMax has always included the ability to represent dispersive materials using a single-pole Debye model. Many materials can be adequately represented using this approach for the typical frequency ranges associated with GPR. However, multi-pole Debye, Drude and Lorentz functions are often used to simulate the electric susceptibility of materials such as: water [PIE2009]_, human tissue [IRE2013]_, cold plasma [LI2013]_, gold [VIA2005]_, and soils [BER1998]_, [GIAK2012]_, [TEI1998]_. Electric susceptibility relates the polarization density to the electric field, and includes both the real and imaginary parts of the complex electric permittivity variation. In the new version of gprMax a recursive convolution based method is used to express dispersive properties as apparent current density sources [GIA2014]_. A major advantage of this implementation is that it creates an inclusive susceptibility function that holds, as special cases, Debye, Drude and Lorentz materials. For further details see the :ref:`material commands section <materials>`.

Realistic soils, heterogeneous objects and rough surfaces
=========================================================

The inclusion of improved models of soils is important for many GPR simulations. gprMax can now be used to create soils with more realistic dielectric and geometrical properties. A semi-empirical model, initially suggested by [DOB1985]_, is used to describe the dielectric properties of the soil. The model relates relative permittivity of the soil to bulk density, sand particle density, sand fraction, clay fraction and water volumetric fraction. Using this approach, a more realistic soil with a stochastic distribution of the aforementioned parameters can be modelled. The real and imaginary parts of this semi-empirical model can be approximated using a multi-pole Debye function plus a conductive term. This can now be achieved in gprMax using the new dispersive material functionality. For further details see the :ref:`material commands section <materials>`.

Fractals are scale invariant functions which can express the topography of the earth for a wide range of scales with sufficient detail [TUR1987]_. For this reason fractals have been chosen to represent the topography of soils. Fractals can be generated by the convolution of Gaussian noise with an inverse Fourier transform of :math:`\frac{1}{kb}`, where :math:`k` is the wavenumber and :math:`b` is a constant related to the fractal dimension [TUR1997]_. gprMax can now generate heterogeneous volumes (boxes) with realistic soil properties that can have rough surfaces applied. For further details see the :ref:`fractal object building commands section <fractals>`.

Fractal correlated noise [TUR1997]_ is used to describe the stochastic distribution of the properties of soils. This approach has been chosen because it has been shown that soil-related environmental properties frequently obey fractal laws [BUR1981]_, [HILL1998]_. For further details see the :ref:`material commands section <materials>` and the :ref:`fractal object building commands section <fractals>`.

.. _antennas:

Library of antenna models
=========================

gprMax now includes Python modules with pre-defined models of antennas that behave similarly to commercial antennas [WAR2011]_ [STA2017]_. Currently models of antennas similar to `Geophysical Survey Systems, Inc. (GSSI) <http://www.geophysical.com>`_ 1.5 GHz (Model 5100) antenna, and 400 MHz antenna, as well as `MALA Geoscience <http://www.malags.com/>`_ 1.2 GHz antenna are included. By taking advantage of our Python API, using such complex structures in a model is straightforward without having to be built step-by-step by the user. For further details see the :ref:`Python API <input-api>` section.

Anisotropic materials
=====================

It is possible to specify objects that have diagonal anisotropy which allows materials such as wood and fibre-reinforced composites, often imaged with GPR, to be more accurately modelled. Standard isotropic objects specify one material identifier that defines the same properties in x, y, and z directions. However, every volumetric object building command can also be specified with three material identifiers, which allows properties for the x, y, and z directions to be separately defined.

Dielectric smoothing
====================

At the boundaries between different materials in a model there is the question of what electric and magnetic material properties to use?

* Should the last object to be defined at that location dictate the electric and magnetic properties?
* Should an average set of electric and magnetic properties of the materials of the objects that share that location be used?

This latter option is often referred to as dielectric smoothing and has been shown to result in more accurate simulations [LUE1994]_ [BOU1996]_ [WHI2009]_. To address this question gprMax includes an option to turn dielectric smoothing on or off for volumetric object building commands. The default behaviour (if no option is specified) is for dielectric smoothing to be on. The option can be specified with a single character ``y`` (on) or ``n`` (off) given after the material identifier in each object command. When dielectric smoothing is on gprMax calculates the arithmetic mean of the electric and magnetic properties of the surrounding Yee cells, to use for the single Yee cell edge (boundary) of interest.

Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) absorbing boundary conditions
===========================================================

With increased research into quantitative information from GPR, it has become necessary for models to be able to have more efficient and better-performing Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) absorbing boundary conditions. Since 2005 gprMax has featured PML absorbing boundary conditions based on the uniaxial PML (UPML) [GED1998]_ formulation. A PML based on a recursive integration approach to the complex frequency shifted (CFS) PML [GIA2012]_ has been adopted in the new version of gprMax. A general formulation of this RIPML, which can be used to develop any order of PML, has been used to implement first and second order CFS stretching functions. One of the attractions of the RIPML is that it is easily applied as a correction to the field quantities after the complete FDTD grid has been updated using the standard FDTD update equations. gprMax now offers the ability (for advanced users) to customise the parameters of the PML which allows its performance to be better optimised for specific applications. Additionally, since the RIPML is media agnostic it can be used without change to problems involving dispersive and anisotropic materials.

Open source, robust, file formats
=================================

Alongside improvements to the input file there is a new output file format – `HDF5 <http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/>`_ – to manage the larger and more complex data sets that are being generated. HDF5 is a robust, portable and extensible format with a number of free readers available. For further details see the :ref:`Simulation Output <output>` section.

In addition, the `Visualization Toolkit (VTK) <http://www.vtk.org>`_ is being used for improved handling and viewing of the detailed 3D FDTD geometry meshes. The VTK is an open-source system for 3D computer graphics, image processing and visualisation. It also has a number of free readers available including `Paraview <http://www.paraview.org>`_. For further details see the :ref:`geometry view command <geometryview>`.
